An announcer is a presenter who makes "announcements" in an audio medium or a physical location.

Contents

Television and other media[edit]
Some announcers work in television production, radio or filmmaking, usually providing narrations, news updates, station identification, or an introduction of a product in television commercials or a guest on a talk show. Music television announcers were also called video jockeys (VJ).
Announcers are often voice actors who read prepared scripts, but in some cases, they have to ad-lib commentary on the air when presenting news, sports, weather, time, and television commercials. Occasionally, announcers are also involved in writing the screenplay or scripts when one is required. Sometimes announcers also interview guests and moderate panels or discussions. Some provide commentary for the audience during sporting events known as sports announcers, parades, and other events.
Announcers perform a variety of tasks including presenting news, sports, weather, traffic, and music. Other duties include interviewing guests, making public appearances at promotional events, announcing station programming information. Announcers are also sometimes responsible for operating studio equipment and producing/selling advertisements. It is becoming more common to use social media networking sites to keep listeners up to date. In 2010, the median salary of an announcer in the United States was $27,010. Television and radio announcers generally have a bachelor’s degree in communications, broadcasting, or journalism.[1]
Radio[edit]
Radio announcers are often known as disc jockeys (DJs). While some read from scripts, others completely ad-lib. These DJs’ tasks consist of on-air interviewing, taking/responding to listener requests, running contests, and making remarks about various subjects like the weather, traffic, sports, and other news. Most radio announcers announce the artists and titles of songs, but don’t necessarily choose what song airs on the radio. Many stations have a management teams who select the songs ahead of time. Today radio stations have DJs update the station’s website with music, guest interviews, show schedules, and photos.[2]
Live events[edit]

Public address (PA) announcers work in physical locations, including sporting venues. They will give the attendees information about performing acts, speakers, players, score (such as a goal or touchdown), infractions, or the results of the event.
Announcers may be specialized according to sport; for instance, a horse race announcer provides a rapid-fire second-by-second account of the race (as well as introducing the entries before the race), while a horse show announcer is the "voice of management" and helps keep the show moving, plays select music and makes announcements during the show. A baseball announcer may simply introduce the next batter or recap the previous half-inning.[3] Public address announcers may be notable due to their longevity, or tenure with a popular team or venue. Some announcers, particularly in horse racing, may also be known for television or radio work.

See also[edit]
Footnotes[edit]