An anthropologist is a person engaged in the practice of anthropology. This generally implies substantial knowledge of the subject and its means of application in their work.
Anthropology is concerned with studying the subject matter of several fields such as archaeological anthropology, sociocultural anthropology, linguistic anthropology and biological anthropology. Forensic anthropology is a subfield of the latter.
There is a sense in which every human being applies anthropology, as understood in a very generous humanistic way. However, to be an anthropologist it is generally accepted that this requires academic attainment such as a college degree. in anthropology, a post teaching anthropology or carrying out anthropological field research, and having published literature in a field of anthropology through a peer-reviewed journal, or is otherwisewidely accepted by other anthropologists as an anthropologist.

Contents

Education[edit]
Anthropologists usually cover a breadth of topics within anthropology in their undergraduate education, and then proceed to specialize in topics of their own choice at the graduate level. In some universities, a qualifying exam serves to test both the breadth and depth of a student's understanding of anthropology; the students who pass are permitted to work on a doctoral dissertation.
Quotations[edit]
The following are quotations about Anthropologists, or by Anthropologists.
"Anthropology is perhaps the last of the great nineteenth-century conglomerate disciplines still for the most part organizationally intact. Long after natural history, moral philosophy, philology, and political economy have dissolved into their specialized successors, it has remained a diffuse assemblage of ethnology, human biology, comparative linguistics, and prehistory, held together mainly by the vested interests, sunk costs, and administrative habits of academia, and by a romantic image of comprehensive scholarship."[1] -- Clifford Geertz on the back cover of Unwrapping the Sacred Bundle (2005).
Further reading[edit]
Some notable anthropologists include: Edward Burnett Tylor, James George Frazer, Franz Boas, Bronisław Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, Margaret Mead, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Clifford Geertz, and Paul Rabinow.
See also[edit]
References[edit]