A presenter host or hostess is a person or organization responsible for the running of a public event. A museum or university, for example, may be the presenter or host of an exhibit. In films, a presenter (but not a host) is a usually a well-known executive producer credited with introducing a film or filmmaker to a larger audience. For example: "Presented by Cecil B. DeMille".

Contents

Broadcast media[edit]
In the broadcast media, a presenter is the person who hosts, narrates, or otherwise takes the main role in narrating or hosting a radio program or a television program. The phrases "television presenter" or "radio presenter" are never used in American English, and rarely in Canada.
A person who hosts other kinds of public entertainments may also be called a master of ceremonies (often abbreviated "M.C." or "emcee").[1]
A television presenter is a person who introduces or hosts television programmes, including factual documentaries, live events, and sports. Nowadays, it is common for minor celebrities in other fields to take on this role, but there are also a number of people who have made their name solely within the field of presenting, particularly within children's television series to become a television personality.
Some presenters may double as an actor, model, singer, comedian, etc. Others may be subject matter experts, such as scientists or politicians, serving as presenters for a programme about their field of expertise (for example, Sir David Attenborough). Some are celebrities who have made their name in one area, and then move on to get involved in other areas. Examples of this latter group include the British comedian Michael Palin who now presents programmes about travel (such as Around the World in 80 Days), and Alan Alda, who has been the host of the Scientific American Frontiers TV program for about a decade.
The term is also used in other countries, such as Ireland and Sri Lanka. In the United States, such a person is always called a host, a hostess (females), or an M.C. (Master of Ceremonies or "emcee").
The term does not apply to reading the news however. This role is known in American English as an anchor, and in British and Commonwealth English as a newsreader. A quiz show host is sometimes also described as a presenter.
Broadly speaking, a radio presenter (often, especially in American English, radio personality) is the same as a television presenter, except that they present radio programs instead of television programs. Big name presenters in the UK include Terry Wogan and Ken Bruce, Tony Blackburn, Simon Mayo, Steve Wright (DJ), Scottie McClue, Mark Radcliffe, Chris Evans, Clint Boon and Greg James.
A sports commentator (also sports announcer, sports broadcaster, sportscaster, or sports presenter) is a type of journalist on radio and/or television who specializes in reporting or commentating on sporting events. Sports casting is often done live.
A weather presenter is a type of journalist on television who specializes in presenting weather forecasts.
In the UK, this includes separate presenters for national and regional/local weather forecasts.
See also[edit]
References[edit]